up to you. Can I start? Okay. Can you hear me? Okay. I am Gabriele Falasca, a front-end
developer working in a company called Surcents and located in Rome. And if you don't understand,
I will speak to you about a finite-state machine with some examples inspired by retro games
of the 90s. Let's start with this slide that is very clear and self-explanatory. A finite-state
machine is an abstract machine that can be exactly in one finite state at any given time.
It can change from a state to another in response to some inputs. This is the Wikipedia definition
of a finite-state machine, and it's a very theoretical definition. But now we will see
how to apply that pattern in programming. For a representative finite-state machine,
you can use the state charts that are sort of graphs where the states, the nodes are
called the states, and the links between the nodes are called the transitions. This is
the state charts of an application that made a fetch call. So we have the state of this
application is idle, loading, success, and failure. And the events that trigger the transition
are fetch event that triggered the transition from idle to loading, react event that triggered
the transition from loading to failure, retrieve event that triggers the transition from failure
to loading, and resolve event that triggered the transition from loading to success. Another
state chart is this, a little bit complex. This is an elevator. An elevator starts in
idle state. When a user calls the elevator, it passes to state to prepare up or prepare
down. When the user selects the floor, elevator passes the state moving until it reaches the
right floor. After it reaches the right floor, elevator passes in state door opening. And
when the user left the cabin, elevator returns to idle state. Now let's create a state chart.
Yes, we are going to create the state chart of this animation. The chart that take off
his panties, military greets, return to idle. So the states of the state chart are idle
state when waiting, panty state, and military state. Before defining transition, I think
I give you some context about this charter. If you don't know, this charter is called
Yakuza Roshimori, a side charter of a arcade game in the 90s called Metaslag. He triggered
this animation when the main character, Marco, worked near to him and he made this animation
for dropping bombs and reward for the main character. So the first event that linked
idle state with the panty state is Marco is near. Second event that connects panty state
with the military state is reward dropped because after dropped the reward, he redress
his panties and greets Marco with the military greets. And after, when Marco is far, he returns
to idle state. Now let's see this event live, but before I want to show you the simplest
code of finite state machine. It's JavaScript because here we are in a room called JavaScript
in the bedroom. But you can apply this pattern in every modern programming language. It's
a simple ES6 class with two methods. One for setting a state and the other one for executing
the routine of the current state. This machine in live we can see here. This is a little
part of Metaslag game in the browser. I made for demo. When you press the arrow right and
left, Marco walks back and forward. And when he's near Yakutaro, in very big screen there
are a lot of iterations. Yakutaro plays his animation, take off the panties and greets
Marco. When Marco returns far, he returns to idle state. Let's see the code of this
demo. We have, you see, I have to zoom. Okay. Okay. This is the HTML page. It's very simple.
It has a shin. That's the shin and two images that are the sprites of two charters. Now
we have a simple entry point of the application that has the HTML list and for the arrow keys.
And initialize the script for Marco and Yakutaro. We have our machine is the same. So in the
slide and the two script for Marco and Yakutaro. Marco is a simple script as just two methods
for going back and forward. And Yakutaro script is as the machine as brain. So it has the
three methods that are the states we have defined before. And another utility method
for observing Marco and trigger the events for change the states of the machine. And
this is just this code. Return to slide. Another type of machine, a bit optimized from this
is the stack based finite state machine. This kind of machine has not a single active state
but a stack of state. And consider active the state on top of the stack. So in this
model you can navigate through the states in back and forward way. Think the history
of the browser like a finite state machine where think to the web pages as the states
and the back and forward event of the browser. The events that trigger the transition. It's
clear. This is the code of stack based finite state machine. It's very similar to the previous
one but we have the stack of the states instead of the active state. And three utility for
pushing and popping the state in the stack. Very simple. If you have to develop more complex
machine there are various tools and framework. In JavaScript the most famous is X8. That
is a series of utility for make state chart and finite state machine. This is the code
of a machine created with X8. It's very functionally way. We have got utility for create the machine.
All configuration based. And the toggle service for sending the event and define the transitions.
My goal in this talk is not to show you a single framework because you can choose one
and study by yourself. I want to explain the theory and the pattern and how to apply to
real life. I introduced X8 because it has a tool called X8 beads that can help you to
test your machine. The tool is this. I don't know if you see. This is the same state chart
of our previous event. And it's interactive. You can trigger the events directly from the
chart and see what's happened. And on the side bar you have three tabs. In the first
one you can put the code of your machine in X8 way. The second tab is the state that contains
all information of the current state of the machine. And from the third tab you can programmatically
send the event for testing your machine. As you can see, I can send the event directly
from here. You can reset the machine. My talk is finished. Have you got any questions?
Okay. Who has the first question? And do raise the hands. Hello. Thank you for your
presentation. What happens to your state if an event is triggered that it can't handle?
Sorry, I don't understand. What happens to your state if an event is triggered that you
can't handle at that state? If they are connected to transition, it doesn't happen. Nothing.
Because the machine responds to the event. So if we are in another state and I send a
resolved event, nothing happens. This depends on the implementation that you use. In X8,
that is the most famous implementation, this thing is safe. So it depends on which machine
you use and how you have implemented. Okay. Another question. Raise your hand very high,
please. What will you think about it? Thank you for the video team up there with the green
T-shirt. They will hear it after. Don't worry. They hear everything. Yeah. How is the animation
graphically that we see on the screen is handled with regard to the state machine? Because
there is some delay. It has some time of duration. Thank you. The animation is how it's made.
I have just the three sprites and every state of the machine set the correct sprite in the
image tag and prepare the machine for the next state. And the observer is update the
state and run the routine of every state. Another question. Okay. Will you be around?
Will you be in the room or outside? There are no more questions. Thanks again. Okay.